1. What is Azure Cloud Service?
-> Cloud service can convey multiple web applications in Azure, characterizing a number of parts to disseminate handling and permit adaptable scaling of your application.
-> The fundamental favorable position of cloud service is the capacity to help more complex multilevel structures.


2. Differentiate between Microsoft Azure and AWS.
Features		Microsoft Azure					Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Analytics		Azure Stream Analytics				Amazon Kinesis
Backup Options		Azure Backup					Amazon Glacier
Compliance		Azure Trust Center				AWS CLoudHSM
Content Delivery Network (CDN)	Azure CDN				Amazon CloudFront
Data Orchestration	Azure Data Factory				AWS Data Pipeline
Hybrid Cloud Storage	StorSimple					AWS Storage Gateway
Monitoring		Azure Operational Insights			Amazon CloudTrail
NoSQL Database Options	Azure DocumentDB				Amazon DynamoDB

3. What is Azure DevOps?
-> Azure DevOps is a SaaS platform that provides development services for creating work 
   plans, working together on code, developing applications, and deploying them. 
-> It offers an end-to-end DevOps toolchain for the development and deployment of software. 
-> It is able to integrate with a number of popular tools in the market and is a great way for setting up a DevOps toolchain.

4. What is Azure Active Directory (Azure AD)?
-> It is a cloud-based IAM solution and directory by Microsoft. It brings together application access management, 
   core directory services, and identity protection and turns them into a single solution. 
-> It helps employees of an organization sign in and access resources such as:
1. External resources, including Microsoft 365, the Azure portal, and a big number of SaaS applications
2. Internal resources, such as apps on a corporate network and intranet, as well as any cloud-based apps built by that organization.
-> Azure AD is intended for use by:
1. IT Admins
2. App Developers
3. Azure, Office 365, Microsoft 365, or Dynamics CRM online subscribers

5. What is Azure Data Factory?
-> Azure Data Factory is a serverless and cloud-based data integration service and platform used for 
   the creation of ETL and ELT pipelines. 
-> It helps in the creation of data-driven workflows for the planning and execution of data movements 
   and data transformation at scale.

6. What is Azure Databricks?
-> Azure Databricks is a Data Analytics platform that offers two environments for the development of data-intensive applications: 
1. Azure Databricks SQL Analytics 
2. Azure Databricks Workspace
-> Azure Databricks’ integration with the security, compute, analytics, storage, and AI services that 
   are natively provided by cloud providers facilitate the unification of data and AI workloads.

7. What is Azure Data Lake?
-> Azure Data Lake is a cloud platform that supports Big Data Analytics through its unlimited storage 
   for structured, semi-structured, or unstructured data of all types and sizes.

8. What are Azure resources?
-> Any entity managed by Azure can be referred to as an Azure resource. 
-> The following are some examples of Azure resources: Storage accounts, virtual networks, virtual machines, etc.

9. What are the roles implemented in Windows Azure?
1. Web Role: It gives a web solution that is front-end. This is like an ASP.NET application. 
   While under facilitating, Azure gives IIS and required services.
2. Worker Role: It gives solutions for background service. It can run long activities.
3. Virtual Machine Role: The roles of both web and worker are executed on virtual machines. The Virtual Machine Roles 
   give the client the capacity to modify the Azure Virtual Machine on which the web and worker roles are running.

10. What are the three principal segments of the Windows Azure platform?
-> Windows Azure has three principal segments: Compute, Storage, and Fabric.
A. Windows Azure Compute: 
-> Windows Azure gives a code that can be managed by the hosting environment. It gives the calculation 
   benefit through parts. Windows Azure backs three types of roles:
  1. Web roles utilized for web application programming and upheld by IIS7
  2. Worker roles utilized for foundation handling of web roles
  3. Virtual machine (VM) roles utilized for moving windows server applications to Windows Azure in a simple way
B. Windows Azure Storage:  It gives four types of storage services:
  1. Queues for informing between web parts and worker roles
  2. Tables for storing structural data
  3. BLOBs (Binary Large Objects) to store contents, records, or vast information
  4. Windows Azure Drives (VHD) to mount a page BLOB. These can be transferred and downloaded by means of BLOBs
C. Windows Azure AppFabric: AppFabric provides five services:
  1. Service bus
  2. Access
  3. Caching
  4. Integration
  5. Composite

11. Define Windows Azure AppFabric.
-> Windows Azure Diagnostics empowers you to gather diagnostic data from an application running in Windows Azure. 
   Diagnostic data is used for capacity planning and evaluation.

12. What is the distinction between Windows Azure Queues and Windows Azure Service Bus Queues?
a. Azure Queues give a solid, diligent messaging between and within the services. 
   They also highlight a very straightforward rest-based get/put/peek interface.
b. Bus Queues are part of a more extensive Windows Azure messaging framework that supports queuing.

13. What is table storage in Windows Azure?
-> Windows Azure Table storage service stores a lot of organized information. Windows Azure tables 
   are perfect for putting away organized, non-relational data.
1. Table: A table is a collection of entities. Tables don’t uphold a blueprint on elements, which 
   implies that a solitary table can contain substances that have distinctive arrangements of properties. 
   A record can contain numerous tables.
2. Entity: An entity is an arrangement of properties, like a database row. An entity can be up to 1 MB in size.
3. Properties: A property is a name-value pair. Every entity can incorporate up to 252 properties 
   to store data. Every entity likewise has three system properties that determine a segment key, a row key, and a timestamp.























































